# USSTEAM-Java-I
Course material for USSTEAM Java I

### Structure

This course structures material over 15, 1 hour long classes targeting students
age 12+ with little or no prior programming experience.

Each class teaches a new fundamental skill to Java programming and challenges
students to apply the new skill with a 'Code Challenge,' a brief excercise
allowing students to apply their theoretical knowledge with practical 
programming skill.

It is recommended that Classes 8 and 9 be taken to review past material and answer
any outstanding questions, included is an optional midyear 'exam' and course
reflection as well as several challenge assignments that could be assigned to
advanced students or performed as a class excercise.

It is recommended that Classes 13, 14, and 15 be allocated entirely to the
final project, where students are tasked with applying all of their skills to
build a small game, recommended are Hangman and Battleship, for each of which
are included sample solutions.

### Syllabous

##### Programming Environment 

###### 2 Classes

*Students should understand and be able to navigate the tools required to make
a Java program*

#### Representing Simple Data

##### 2 Classes

*Students will be comfortable will all primitive types in Java and be able to
choose how to represent real-world data*

#### Control Flow

##### 2 Classes

*Students will understand how a program will run and be able to control the 
order in which code is executed, making use of if statements and loops*

#### Distributing Logic

##### 2 Classes

*Students will understand the purpose of and be comfortable implementing methods
that serve a specific need*

#### More Complex Data

##### 1 Class

*Students will use arrays to represent more complex data*

#### Final Project

##### 3 Classes

*Students will plan, implement, debug and share their skills as a small game*

### Final Project

Because project-based learning is the most effective, a large portion of the
course is allocated to developing a small game in order to demonstrate the 
practical side of programming.

While there are a number of suitable final projects, given the target audience
of this course, a simple game is an appealing way to attract interest as well
implement all of the skills learned through the course.

Depending on the students' level of mastery, recommended are Hangman -- an 
easier implementation that students should be able to achieve with only basic
guidance and instructor direction -- and Battleship -- a much more challenging
game targeted towards students who demonstrate high aptitude and high interest.

For each of these I have included samples written primarily by students,
[Hangman](https://github.com/acabey/ussteam-hangman/)
[Battleship](https://github.com/acabey/ussteam-battleship)

### Licensing

All material is owned by Andrew Cabey and Ryan Marten

Rights are reserved for owners

Material is licensed under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 
International, free for non-commercial use


